Traitors Design Document (Real) (#554)
space-wizards/docs: src/en/space-station-14/round-flow/antagonists/traitors.md

|---|---|---|---|
| Princess Cheeseballs | coder names here | :white_check_mark: Yes or :warning: Partially or :information_source: Open PR or :x: No | PR Links or TBD |

## Overview

Traitors is the bread and butter default gamemode of space station 14. Traitors gamemode is characterized by a select number of crewmembers being selected to betray the station, hindering its functionality and pursuing their own goals. 

## Game Design Rationale

Traitors by design should be as loose as possible in terms of restrictions. They are designed to betray the station and hinder it as much as possible, if Traitors can do this too easily the gamemode ceases to be interesting. Traitors should be an expression of creativity with objectives that are direct and simple but have many different ways to be accomplished to facillitate creativity. 

Traitors should also be evasive, their primary strength is that they are normal crewmembers covered by space law, but that doesn't save them if they're easy to catch. Their arsenal should consist of cheap and reliable stealth and deception options which can keep them just out of reach of security as long as possible. 

### Tools

> The main hinderance of traitors should be resources. Health, ammo, and materials with much of their time being spent trying to gather resources to do their objectives. They shouldn't feel like their uplink will enough resources to complete all their objectives, but also never feel like it's impossible to get these resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main hinderance of traitors should be resources. Health, ammo, and materials with much of their time being spent trying to gather resources to do their objectives. They shouldn't feel like their uplink has enough resources to complete all their objectives, but also never feel like it's impossible to get these resources.
```

Do:

> - A traitor needs to kill prevent a department from functioning, so they start scrounging materials to create a bomb which will disable the department

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A traitor needs to prevent a department from functioning. They scrounge for materials to create a bomb which will disable the department.
```

Stealth and deception tools should be ubiquitous. Traitors gain a lot by blending in with the station, and it makes them interesting. Stealth, however, is very strong in combat as well so all tools need to be balanced carefully. 

#### Tools of Deception

Tools of deception are to be used by a traitor to blend in. They should support a traitor who is trying to play it smart with big plans, and as such they should be hard to discredit. An ideal tool of deception concretely support any deception a traitor may try to pull off, with the main pitfalls being the deception itself. A tool of deception doesn't really work if there's a master key that can quickly or easily negate it, rather the station should have to try and actively disprove the deception. 

Anything which changes a traitor's identity, or changes concrete station information would be considered a tool of deception. These tools should never directly benefit a traitor in combat, only be used to evade and misdirect which can buy a traitor more time, or more resources. 

#### Tools of Stealth

> Tools of stealth are to be used by a traitor to evade detection. They are distinct from deception tools in that they are intended to be tools which directly forward an agent's objectives while also preventing discovery. This would include items with jam communications, obscure or occlude a traitors physical appearance, or tools which cannot be detected through observation. Unlikes tools of deception, these tools are often used to complete objectives while also doubling as ways to evade detection. As such they need to be balanced differently compared to tools of deception. These items can directly aid in combat but should be designed with limitations such that they are not unfair in combat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tools of Stealth: Evade Detection

These are distinct from deception tools in that they are intended to be tools which directly forward an agent's objectives while also preventing discovery. This would include items which jam communications, obscure or occlude a traitors physical appearance, or silent tools that are harder to see and hear. Unlike tools of deception, these tools are suspicious when closely observed. As such they need to be balanced differently compared to tools of deception. These items can directly aid in combat but should be designed with limitations such that they are not unfair in combat.
```

- An normal pen which can hack open doors, but takes a while to do so.
- A gun that looks like a normal briefcase.
- An item which jams communications and cameras delaying the ability for the station to respond to your attack on a department
Dont:
- A suit with a rechargable battery that makes you invisible while also providing armor.

#### Tools of Sabatoge

These tools generally cover items which assist a traitor in hindering the station or collecting resources for their objectives. These would include items which allow a traitor to hack open doors, hack lathes to print ammo, or blow a hole through a wall. These items can be stealthy but shouldn't ever be stealth tools. They should be obvious when seen, clearly labeled as syndicate contraband, and trade their obviousness for ease of use and hasteness. Sometimes your best friend in stealth is being able to get that door open in under one second, and in combat or when evading arrest getting a door open quickly can mean the difference between life and death. 

Do:
- You buy a station blackout to give you the cover of darkness to sneak into a place you shouldn't be sneaking into.
Dont:

> - You buy an item 

Reviewer: Remove traitor confirmed.

#### Tools of Violence

> These cover the tools which a traitor uses to kill or disable others. This category includes both lethal and nonlethal weapons, since nonlethal weapons don't truly exist. A stunned or asleep target is a dead target if you know what you're doing. These tools should be threatening and very powerful, if a traitor's weapons are weak, they're not much of a threat. The limitations should be primarily resource based. A melee weapon is strong, but it doesn't afford you the ability to hurt anyone not in your immediate vicinity. A gun is powerful, but you may not have the ammo to kill everyone you meet. Armor is useful, but it's obvious, expensive, and bulky. A traitor who goes all in on violence should be sacrificing safety options for evading capture or detection. It should be an incredibly risky and unreliable strategy rewarded by being a true test of skill. As such these tools should be balanced cost wise where if you want all the tools to commit unspeakable acts of violence and only violence, you will exhaust your TC budget completely, and still be lacking in some areas which will require some planning. Maybe you don't have enough medicine? Maybe you don't have enough ammo? Maybe you're gonna need to find a weapon? Violence should be a test of game knowledge and skill in and out of combat to acquire the tools to make a strong kit. 

Reviewer 2: I think this is well put! It could go further into specifics of how they could be balanced however. People often talk about how one traitor shouldnt be more or even as powerful as a security officer, or how they should be able to handle about two without mentioning how variable their loadouts and approaches can be. I think clarifications in this area can narrow it down, such as traitors with a couple kill objectives being on about equal grounds with a security officer, someone needing a single kill and to steal things should be typically weaker than, but if they are well prepared to go loud and have the skill to back it up (Combat could probably use a higher skill ceiling but thats irrelevant) they could take down a handfull of people. I am particularly interested in this area of balancing because of rules regarding 2.9 which I know you mention at the end.

- You buy a crate full of materials for a small amount of TC to build a nefarious contraption with.
Dont: 
- You buy an item which lets you inject effectively limitless medicine and drugs into your bloodstream instantly .
- You spend a large chunk of your budget on a kit of stimulants which are only enough to evade security once or twice.

### Objectives

Traitors should have either many objectives which strongly impact the round through small sabatoges that are felt by everyone through quantity, or large objectives which everyone feels if accomplished. No objective should have one clear path to complete it, and no objective should be so unimpactful that the general station reaction is a shrug and moving on to more important things. Their objectives should feel important so much so that it may bring them into conflict with other traitors.

Do:
- A traitor has to kill multiple people, so they get a gun and some utility items to perform a number of hit and run attacks which keep the station on its toes for a while.

> - A traitor has to kill the captain, so they disguise as the head of security and assassinate the captain stealthily allowing them to continue acting antagonistically throughout the round

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A traitor has to kill the captain, so they disguise as the head of security and assassinate the captain stealthily allowing them to continue acting antagonistically throughout the round.
```

### Tools

The main hinderance of traitors should be resources. Health, ammo, and materials with much of their time being spent trying to gather resources to do their objectives. They shouldn't feel like their uplink has enough resources to complete all their objectives, but also never feel like it's impossible to get these resources.
Do:
- A traitor needs to prevent a department from functioning, so they scrounge up some materials to create a bomb which will level that department.
- As one of their many objectives a traitor has to kill the captain. They spend time finding a source of armor, ammunition and a disguise so they can ensure they can kill the captain and ensure escape into the shadows before security can catch them. 
Dont: 
- A traitor with one kill objective buys a gun with plenty of magazines and kills their target. They then spend the rest of the round doing nothing.
- A traitor needs to disable a single machine in a department, so they buy a single brick of C4 to level it.

> Traitors, being a main round antag, should be driving the round and their objectives and tools should reflect that. Similarly to the ninja, traitors should be an evasive threat that's hard but possible to pin down, who causes lots of disruption when not dealt with. Unlike the ninja, the traitor should have a lot more freedom in their ability to accomplish this. Deception, Stealth, Sabatoge, Murder, and anything else a traitor can think of should be on the menu. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traitors, being a main-round antag, should be driving the round, and their objectives and tools should reflect that. Similarly to the ninja, traitors should be an evasive threat that's hard but possible to pin down, who causes lots of disruption when not dealt with. Unlike the ninja, the traitor should have a lot more freedom in their ability to accomplish this. Deception, Stealth, Sabatoge, Murder, and anything else a traitor can think of should be on the menu. 
```

- A set of gloves which allows you to strip items quietly and are completely indistuishable from normal gloves. 

#### Tools of Sabatoge: Bending the Station's Assets to Your Will

These tools generally cover items which assist a traitor in hindering the station or collecting resources for their objectives. These would include items which allow a traitor to hack open doors, hack lathes to print ammo, or blow a hole through a wall. 

These items can be used alongside stealth, but shouldn't ever be stealth tools or exclusively useful for stealth. They should be obvious when seen, obviously syndicate contraband, but also quick and easy to use. Speed is often your best friend in both combat and stealth, a single second could mean the difference between getting caught and getting away! Ideally, these tools should have broad usecases so they're rarely a sunk cost purchase, but never to the point where they become an "all-in-one" tool.

Do:
- You buy a station blackout to give you the cover of darkness to sneak into a place you shouldn't be sneaking into.
- You buy an item which draws a lot of power from engineering and if it isn't dealt with quickly, it explodes violently. 
Dont:

> - You buy an item which allows you to make a massive portion of the station uninhabitable and leaves behind zero evidence of who did it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You buy an item that allows you to make a massive portion of the station uninhabitable and leaves behind zero evidence of who did it.
```

- You buy an item which allows you to hack doors, hack borgs, print ammo, and change your PDA light in one compact package.

> - You buy an item which allows you to hack one very specific door on the station and nothing else.

Reviewer 3: So be it.

#### Tools of Violence: Making the Station Bleed

Tools which are useful for those with the intent to disable or kill crewmembers. This includes both lethal and nonlethal weapons, since nonlethal weapons typically give lethal opportunities. These tools must be threatening, they are what give the traitor the backbone to make security second guess chasing a traitor into maintenance alone. 

> Weapons should be balanced with a "role" in mind, and no two weapons should feel identical in use and playstyle. For example, an smg and a shotgun may both be loud weapons designed to kill, but they play distinctly differently due to different firerates, sizes, and ammunition available. Two guns could use the same ammo type, but one may be silent with a lower firerate, making it a strong assassination weapon. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Weapons should be balanced with a "role" in mind, and no two weapons should feel identical in use and playstyle. For example, an SMG and a shotgun may both be loud weapons designed to kill, but they play distinctly differently due to different firing rates, sizes, and ammunition available. Two guns could use the same ammo type, but one may be silent and have a lower fire rate, making it a strong assassination weapon. 
```

> What's most key for all weapons should be none should ever be the best for all situations. A powerful gun that can deal a lot of sustained damage should never be stealthy, and always be large. A silenced gun may be great for single target assassinations but doesn't have the DPS or magazine size to sustain itself in a firefight. Melee weapons trade reliability for range. Explosives are loud, obvious, expensive, clunky to use, and limited in their availability. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What's most key for all weapons is that none should ever be the best for all situations. A powerful gun that can deal a lot of sustained damage should never be stealthy, and always be large. A silenced gun may be great for single-target assassinations. Still, it doesn't have the DPS or magazine size to sustain itself in a firefight—Melee weapons trade reliability for range. Explosives are loud, obvious, expensive, clunky to use, and hard to obtain. 
```

Armor is incredibly useful, argubaly more than guns. Guns can be acquired easily without an uplink if you know where to get them, so armor is often the more pressing purchase. Armor should always be visually obvious and distinct, one should be able to immediately tell that you're a traitor if you're wearing traitor armor. It's not a purchase you make if you're trying to do anything subtle. Armor should be bulky, expensive, obvious, and greatly extend your survivability. 

> As such these tools should be balanced cost wise where if you want all the tools to commit unspeakable acts of violence and only violence, you will exhaust your TC budget and still be lacking in some areas which will require some planning. Maybe you don't have enough medicine? Maybe you don't have enough ammo? Maybe you're gonna need to find a weapon? Maybe you only have one weapon? Maybe if you get cornered you have no way out? Violence should be a test of game knowledge and skill in and out of combat to acquire the tools to make a strong kit. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As such, these tools should be balanced cost-wise, where if you want all the tools to commit unspeakable acts of violence and only violence, you will exhaust your TC budget and still be lacking in some areas, which will require some planning. Maybe you don't have enough medicine? Maybe you don't have enough ammo? Maybe you're gonna need to find a weapon? Maybe you only have one weapon? Maybe if you get cornered, you have no way out? Violence should be a test of game knowledge and skill in and out of combat to acquire the tools to make a strong kit. 
```

- You buy a crate full of materials for a small amount of TC to build a nefarious contraption with.
Dont: 
- You buy an item which lets you inject effectively limitless medicine and drugs into your bloodstream instantly.
- You spend a large chunk of your budget on a kit of stimulants which are only enough to evade security once or twice.

### Objectives

Traitor objectives need to be impactful and shouldn't encourage passive play and should be noticable. Ideally these objectives should also further their interestests as well. Overall traitors should have a wider variety of objectives ranging from low difficulty easy to secure objectives which are noticable but don't have permanent effects, to a larger overarching objective which requires active effort or preparation to complete. 

Objectives should not be easily reversible, either because they become locked in when completed, are unable to be reverse due to permanently altering the round in some way, are so wide in scope that they're extremely difficult for the station to recover from, or because they fail due to inactivity from a traitor. 

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor has to kill multiple people. They get a gun and some utility items to carry out a series of hit-and-run attacks, keeping the station on its toes for a while.
```

Besides the "hit-and-run" part, this is mostly about rewording.

> Recovery from objectives should be directly proportional to their rarity. A machine being broken is easy to recover from and therefore common, A department losing a big chunk of their funds requires a lot of time to recover from and therefore should be uncommon, A department head being gibbed requires a lot of paperwork and security involvement making it rare, and an entire department being rendered unable to operate is near unrecoverable and should be extremely rare. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor has to kill the captain, so they disguise themselves as the head of security and assassinate the captain stealthily, allowing them to continue acting antagonistically throughout the round.
```

> No traitor should feel less impactful than another due to their objectives, a traitor with a single extremely rare objective should be as much of a nuissance as one who only has extremely common objectives, quantity should be used to make up the difference. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor needs to keep science from completing their research, so they spend the majority of the round blowing up anomalies and sabotaging the science department.
```

You've spelled 'sabotage' as 'sabotoge' a few times. Take your time and make sure you're spelling words correctly.

The impact of objectives being completed should naturally bring traitors into conflict with the station and therefore other traitors. For example, one traitor needs to prevent sci from completing their research, another traitor who is a scientist, wants to complete their research to help them with one of their objectives, lastly a third traitor needs to steal research from sci. These objectives naturally conflict and require either cooperation or competition to resolve such conflict.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor needs to steal the chief engineer's magboots, so they kill the chief engineer, then hide in space the whole shift.
```

> Do:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor has to kill one random passenger and survive. The passenger is killed in maintenance, and nobody notices or particularly cares.
```

> - A traitor has to kill multiple people. They get a gun and some utility items to perform a number of hit and run attacks which keep the station on its toes for a while.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- One traitor has to steal one item and escape; three traitors need to help them achieve their objectives. All of them need not get caught.  
```

- A traitor has to kill the captain, so they disguise as the head of security and assassinate the captain stealthily allowing them to continue acting antagonistically throughout the round.
- A traitor has to sabatoge a major piece of infrastructure so they spend the majority of the round preparing the tools needed to disable it, then break in and kill anyone trying to stop them. This action forces evac to be called.
- A traitor needs to keep science from completing their research so they spend the majority of the round blowing up anomalies and sabatoging the science department.
- A traitor needs to destroy a few high value assets, they plant bombs and remotely detonate them causing trouble for the crew that is reversible but their objective remains completed. 
Dont:

> - A traitor has a steal objective, this will put a target on their back the whole round so they stealthly take the item on evac after doing nothing the whole round.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traitors works best when you can reliably act on your own, with teamwork being a nice optional bonus for those willing to spend the time organizing a coordinated plan. 
```

- A traitor needs to steal the cheif engineer's magboots, so they kill the chief engineer then hide in space the whole shift.
- A traitor has to kill one random passenger and survive. The passenger is killed in maintenance and nobody notices or particularly cares.
- One traitor has to steal one item and escape, three traitors need to help them do their objectives. All of them need to not get caught. 

### Solo Antagonists

Traitors are solo antagonists with their own objectives. This should be enforced by not or very rarely encouraging teamwork. Help objectives should be rare, items which require two traitors to collaborate to use shouldn't exist, and objectives should conflict naturally and not directly. Ideally we don't want traitors to be relying on other traitors either through "I need to assassinate this traitor" or "I need this traitor to do one thing so I can help/stop them". 

Traitors works best when you can reliably act on your own with teamwork being a nice optional bonus for those willing to spend the time organizing a coordinated plan. 

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The game should sit in a sweet spot in the middle, where security feels they have to conduct random searches to catch up to the traitors and keep the peace, while the crew is held back in an uphill battle against traitors sabotaging their departments. 
```

## Roundflow & Player interaction

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A typical round of traitors should start with each traitor receiving their list of objectives. These objectives should encourage antagonistic activity throughout the round, either due to quantity or difficulty. 
```

Players should feel the impact of traitors as the round progresses. Ideally the traitors gamemode is a slow burn similar to survival. There's a couple highlights here and there, but things begin to ramp up as the round progresses and traitors with larger and more difficult objectives begin completing or attempting to complete them. Department heads should start going missing and require replacements, machines should start breaking and require workarounds, and the station should struggle to maintain operation. 

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Higher quantity objectives should be easy to complete, hard to reverse, and have a tangible impact on the round but not be round-ending. These could include killing a random crewmember or actively sabotaging some common machine. This allows even new traitors to have some tangible impact on the round, even if they are caught immediately and executed. 
```

Traitors should be felt but often unseen. Part of the traitor experience should be the worry about who is a traitor, as such unmasking and catching all traitors should be a rare but possible outcome. Most rounds should end with all traitors completing some of their objectives with a few completing them all. 

A round where the majority of traitors completely redtext and nothing happens should be completely avoided if possible. On the other hand, a round where all traitors greentext and completely sweep the station and security department should be exceedingly rare.

The game should sit in a sweet spot in the middle where security feels they have to do random searches to catch up to the traitors and keep the peace, while the crew is held back in an upward battle against traitors sabatoging their departments. 

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we balance traitors properly, we can loosen 2.9 further, which is always a good thing. Weakening combat through limiting resources, such as ammo, while strengthening stealth and increasing objectives overall, should make traitor rounds more interesting and fun. 
```

# Traitors

| Designers | Coders | Implemented | GitHub Links |
|---|---|---|---|
| Princess Cheeseballs | coder names here | :white_check_mark: Yes or :warning: Partially or :information_source: Open PR or :x: No | PR Links or TBD |

## Overview

Traitors is the bread and butter default gamemode of space station 14. Traitors gamemode is characterized by a select number of crewmembers being selected to betray the station, hindering its functionality and pursuing their own goals. 

## Game Design Rationale

> Traitors by design should be as loose as possible in terms of restrictions. They are designed to betray the station and hinder it as much as possible, if Traitors can do this too easily the gamemode ceases to be interesting. Traitors should be an expression of creativity with objectives that are direct and simple but have many different ways to be accomplished to facillitate creativity. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Traitors are designed to betray and hinder the station. However, players lose interest in the Traitor gamemode if Traitor antagonists can do this too easily and quickly.

The Traitor gamemode should be an expression of creativity, which will be facilitated by interesting objectives. Each objective must be simple and direct to encourage multiple methods of completion.
```

Dont: 
- A traitor with one kill objective buys a gun with plenty of magazines and kills their target. They then spend the rest of the round doing nothing.
- A traitor needs to disable a single machine in a department, so they buy a single brick of C4 to level it.

Traitors, being a main-round antag, should be driving the round, and their objectives and tools should reflect that. Similarly to the ninja, traitors should be an evasive threat that's hard but possible to pin down, who causes lots of disruption when not dealt with. Unlike the ninja, the traitor should have a lot more freedom in their ability to accomplish this. Deception, Stealth, Sabatoge, Murder, and anything else a traitor can think of should be on the menu. 

Stealth and deception tools should be ubiquitous. Traitors gain a lot by blending in with the station, and it makes them interesting. Stealth, however, is very strong in combat as well, so all tools need to be balanced carefully. 

#### Tools of Deception: Blending In

> Tools that help a traitor blend in. These tools are best suited for a traitor with big plans that rely heavily on deception and subterfuge. An ideal tool of deception concretely supports any deception a traitor may try to pull off, with the main pitfalls being the deception itself. A tool of deception doesn't really work if there's a master key that can quickly or easily negate it; rather, the station should have to actively try to disprove the deception. The usefulness of these tools, much like the tools of violence, comes down entirely to the skill of the traitor using them, compared to the skills of those they are using them against. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tools that help a traitor blend in. These tools are best suited for a traitor with big plans that rely heavily on deception and subterfuge. An ideal tool of deception concretely supports any deception a traitor may try to pull off, with the main pitfalls being the deception itself. A tool of deception doesn't really work if there's a master key that can quickly or easily negate it; rather, the station should have to try to disprove the deception actively. The usefulness of these tools, much like the tools of violence, comes down entirely to the skill of the traitor using them, compared to the skills of those they are using them against. 
```

Split infinitives.

Traitors works best when they can reliably act on their own. Teamwork always be an optional investment of time in exchange for coordination and numbers.

## Roundflow & Player interaction

Players should feel the impact of traitors as the round progresses. Ideally, the traitors gamemode is a slow burn, similar to survival. There are a couple of highlights here and there, but things begin to ramp up as the round progresses. Traitors with larger and more difficult objectives begin completing or attempting to complete them. Department heads should start going missing and require replacements, machines start breaking and requiring workarounds, and the station should struggle to maintain normal operations eventually forcing evac.

> Traitors should be felt but often unseen. Part of the traitor experience should be the worry about who is a traitor; as such, unmasking and catching all traitors should be a rare but possible outcome. Most rounds should end with all traitors completing some of their objectives, with a few completing them all. 

Reviewer 4: I would point out that traitors being able to identify each other easily may be a double-edged sword, as it means security can compromise one traitor in exchange for codewords and identities of all the others. This is seen when security taps syndicate comms.

Author: Ngl, I'm ambivalent on Syndie comms I don't want to make a proper stance on them since whether or not they're purchasable is really who care to me.

A typical round of traitors should start with each traitor receiving their list of objectives. These objectives should encourage antagonistic activity throughout the round, either due to quantity or difficulty. 

Higher quantity objectives should be easy to complete, hard to reverse, and have a tangible impact on the round but never be round-ending on their own. These could include killing a random crewmember or actively sabotaging some common machine. This allows even new traitors to have some tangible impact on the round, even if they are caught immediately and executed. 

A lower in quantity objective would be something that requires active effort to complete. These shouldn't be things you can wait until evac to do; for example, you may need to prevent a department from functioning normally lest they complete some objective, or you may need to prepare yourself to do one very difficult job that will draw a lot of attention once you start. In both scenarios, the Traitor should be encouraged to spend the round causing problems either to complete their objective or gather resources for their objective. 

## Administrative & Server Rule Impact (if applicable)

> If we balance traitors properly, we can loosen 2.9 further, which is always a good thing. Weakening combat through limiting resources, such as ammo, while strengthening stealth and increasing objectives overall, should make traitor rounds more interesting and fun.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Exchanging a portion of the traitor's current lethality and destructive potential with low-level insurgency and sabotage will allow Wizden to loosen Rule 2.9, which will reduce admin workload.
```

# Traitors

| Designers | Coders | Implemented | GitHub Links |
|---|---|---|---|
| Princess Cheeseballs | coder names here | :white_check_mark: Yes or :warning: Partially or :information_source: Open PR or :x: No | PR Links or TBD |

## Overview

Traitors is the bread-and-butter default gamemode of Space Station 14. Traitors gamemode is characterized by a select number of crew members being chosen to betray the station, hindering its functionality and pursuing their own goals. 

> Traitors aesthetically should range from professional insurgents and spies, to corporate thugs. Traitors should feel scrappy; explicitly loud branded confrontations should be suicide missions, more tactful planned approaches should be rewarded. When fighting a larger foe, you must rely on your wits primarily to bleed them dry through attrition, that and a handful of expensive state of the art toys.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traitors, aesthetically, should range from professional insurgents and spies to corporate thugs. Traitors should feel scrappy; explicitly loud, branded confrontations should be suicide missions, and more tactful, planned approaches should be rewarded. When fighting a larger foe, you must rely on your wits primarily to bleed them dry through attrition, that and a handful of expensive state-of-the-art toys.
```

## Game Design Rationale

> Traitors are intended to be a major hindrance to the station, with as few restrictions as possible to accomplish that goal. It should be a traitor's goal to cripple the station as much as possible through betrayal and sabotage without artificial restrictions or limitations placed on them. This should be no easy task; if it is trivial to cripple the station then Traitors cease to be interesting. On the other hand, if it's too difficult, they cease to be a threat. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traitors are intended to be a major hindrance to the station, with as few restrictions as possible to accomplish that goal. It should be a traitor's goal to cripple the station as much as possible through betrayal and sabotage without artificial restrictions or limitations placed on them. This should be no easy task; if it is trivial to cripple the station, then Traitors cease to be interesting. On the other hand, if it's too difficult, they cease to be a threat. 
```

Creativity and freedom should be the highlights of the Traitors antagonist. Objectives should be designed so a player can flex their skills and creativity, keeping the gamemode unpredictable. High skill plays and creative thinking should be rewarded and supported.

> The greatest strength a Traitor has is their evasiveness. Traitors are ordinary crew members covered by space law, which gives them much more freedom for social manipulation and a much bigger cushion for failure. Stealth and deception should be the forte of traitors, but a more direct and violent approach should always be an option to give them a strong backbone. A Traitor, being hard to pin down keeps the station busy and keeps the round interesting. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The greatest strength a Traitor has is their evasiveness. Traitors are ordinary crew members covered by space law, which gives them much more freedom for social manipulation and a much bigger cushion for failure. Stealth and deception should be the forte of traitors, but a more direct and violent approach should always be an option to give them a strong backbone. A Traitor, being hard to pin down, keeps the station busy and keeps the round interesting. 
```

### Tools

The main hindrance of traitors should be resources. Health, ammo, and materials, with much of their time spent gathering resources to achieve their objectives. A Traitor should never feel like their uplink can provide everything they'll need for every situation. Specialization and planning should be important if a traitor wants to complete all their objectives, and much of their time should be spent accounting for holes in their kit. 

Do:

> - A traitor needs to prevent a department from functioning, so they scrounge up some materials to create a bomb that will level that department, then spend their TC budget on items to accomplish this unseen with a bit left over for insurance. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A traitor needs to prevent a department from functioning, so they scrounge up some materials to create a bomb that will level that department, then spend their TC budget on items to accomplish this unseen, with a bit left over for insurance. 
```

Anything that changes a traitor's identity or changes concrete station information would be considered a tool of deception. These tools should never directly benefit a traitor in combat; they should only be used to evade and misdirect, which can buy a traitor more time or more resources. These tools should also be some of the cheapest to acquire, as they are context-dependent, and deception should play a large role in the Traitor's gamemode. 

#### Tools of Stealth: Evading Detection

Tools that help a traitor forward their objectives stealthily. These are different from tools of deception in that they are intended to help prevent discovery while an agent is being proactive. These would include items that disrupt vision or communication, and tools or weapons that appear to be something completely mundane. 

> Unlike tools of deception, these tools are useful for a wide variety of approaches and are actively useful in completing objectives. As such, they should be designed with much clearer flaws and limitations so that they aren't oppressive, especially so for items which could potentially turn the tide in combat. Generally, these items should be easier to unmask compared to items of deception; the point of these items is to help you avoid getting caught after all.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike tools of deception, these tools are useful across a wide variety of approaches and actively help achieve objectives. As such, they should be designed with flaws and limitations that are much clearer so they aren't oppressive, especially for items that could potentially turn the tide in combat. Generally, these items should be easier to unmask compared to items of deception; the point of these items is to help you avoid getting caught after all.
```

Ideally, stealth items should be proactively used, not something that you keep on you, which provides a passive and permanent benefit. They're an investment a traitor is making, and they should be priced appropriately. While not as expensive as more offensive options, their TC cost should reflect the doors they open to completing objectives and acquiring resources while remaining undetected. 

Do:
- A disguise that lets you pull off a one-time ambush before it needs to be recharged or discarded.
- An invisible box that lets you sneak into places, but prevents tool usage while active.
- A normal pen which, when triggered, can hack open doors, but takes a while to do so.
- A gun that looks like a normal briefcase.
- An item that jams communications and cameras, delaying the ability for the station to respond to your attack on a department.
Dont:
- A suit with a rechargeable battery that makes you invisible while also providing armor.

> - A set of gloves that allows you to strip items quietly and are completely indistinguishable from normal gloves.

Reviewer 5: Add that traitors should not have tools that overlap with other antagonists too much, for example wizard spell items or a changeling armblade implant. While they are a free-form antagonists they should keep their own identity.
And I think it's important mentioning this because each time we had new features for other antags we immediately got PRs trying to add them to traitors.

Reviewer 5: I think it's worth mentioning here as well since it has often been a problem for traitors specifically, with many PRs being made for new items that violated this criteria.

These items should be cheap and expendable since they extend a traitor's impact on the round. Items that last long amounts of time or provide an indefinite passive buff to a traitor shouldn't exist. Medicine runs out, batteries drain, and money doesn't grow on trees (at least not without some effort in making them grow).

Do:
- You buy an implant for a negligible amount of TC, which allows you to evade security in a pinch, but only a limited number of times.
- You buy a one-time use healing item, which heals a sizable chunk of your damage for a small TC cost, allowing you to turn the tables in a skirmish you would've lost otherwise.
- You buy a crate full of materials for a small amount of TC to build a nefarious contraption with.
Dont: 
- You buy an item that lets you inject effectively limitless medicine and drugs into your bloodstream instantly.
- You spend a large chunk of your budget on a kit of stimulants, which are only enough to evade security once or twice.

### Tools of the Trade: Being Unique

> This covers job specific tools and as such is extremely nonspecific. Job specific tools should be strong and very unique. There is a risk being put forward in using an item that heavily narrows down the number of suspects and that risk should be rewarded. Normal balance suggestions for all other categories still apply but generally these items should be cheaper rather than stronger such that they don't become meta. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This covers job-specific tools and, as such, is extremely nonspecific. Job-specific tools should be strong and very unique. There is a risk being put forward in using an item that heavily narrows down the number of suspects, and that risk should be rewarded. Normal balance suggestions for all other categories still apply, but generally these items should be cheaper rather than stronger, such that they don't become meta. 
```

In addition job specific items should justify themselves through flavor and playing into the strengths of the job they're specific to. These should if possible, play into the normal duties of a job without replacing those duties and especially shouldn't be beneficial to the station if used. 

Do:
- The clown buys a banana peel that explodes.

> - The engineer can purchase faulty machine parts which cause machines that use them to break down.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The engineer can purchase faulty machine parts that cause machines that use them to break down.
```

Dont:
- The doctor gets access to medicine for cheaper.
- The engineer can purchase insualted gloves, or a faster RCD. 

### Objectives

> All Traitor objectives must have a meaningful impact on the round. This can range from a temporary setback to evac having to be called. These objectives should also cause chaos and help further other objectives through their completion, sabatoging a machine may open up new opportunities in its wake. Objectives should have strong variety to prevent repetition and predictability, and have multiple viables approaches for completion. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All Traitor objectives must have a meaningful impact on the round. This can range from a temporary setback to the need to call evac. These objectives should also cause chaos and help further other objectives through their completion. Sabotaging a machine may open up new opportunities in its wake. Objectives should offer a diverse range to prevent repetition and predictability, and should include multiple viable approaches for completion. 
```

Objectives should not be easily reversible, either because they become locked in when completed, are unable to be reverse due to permanently altering the round in some way, are so wide in scope that they're extremely difficult for the station to recover from, or because they fail due to inactivity from a traitor. The station should also never feel like a traitor doing traitor things is ignorable. We never want the reaction for an objective being completed to be an ambivalent shrug, someone needs to clean up their mess. 

Recovery from objectives should be directly proportional to their rarity. A machine being broken is easy to recover from and therefore more common. Losing a department head is a big security and command headache and should be proprotionally less common. An entire department being rendered unable to operate should be appropriately rare. 

> No traitor should feel less impactful than another due to their objectives, a traitor with a single extremely rare objective should be as much of a nuissance as one who only has extremely common objectives, quantity should be used to make up the difference. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No traitor should feel less impactful than another due to their objectives. A traitor with a single extremely rare objective should be as much of a nuisance as one who only has extremely common objectives. Quantity should be used to make up the difference. 
```

- A traitor has to sabotage a piece of key infrastructure, so they spend the majority of the round preparing the tools needed to disable it, then break in and kill anyone trying to stop them. This action forces evac to be called.
- A traitor needs to keep science from completing their research, so they spend the majority of the round blowing up anomalies and sabotaging the science department.
- A traitor needs to destroy a few high value assets, they plant bombs and remotely detonate them causing trouble for the crew that is reversible but their objective remains completed. 
Dont:
- A traitor has a steal objective, this will put a target on their back the whole round, so they stealthily take the item on evac.
- A traitor needs to steal the chief engineer's magboots, so they kill the chief engineer, then hide in space the whole shift.
- A traitor has to kill one random passenger and survive. The passenger is killed in maintenance, and nobody notices or particularly cares.
- One traitor has to steal one item and escape; three traitors need to help them achieve their objectives. All of them need not get caught.  

### Solo Antagonists

> Every Traitor is a solo antagonist. This doesn't explicitly forbid teamwork nor does it encourage betrayal, but all design must treat Traitors as solo antagonists. Items, objectives, or abilities which explicitly force teamwork or confrontation with other traitors should be avoided. Conflict and teamwork should be built naturally through the individual actions each Traitor makes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every Traitor is a solo antagonist. This doesn't explicitly forbid teamwork nor does it encourage betrayal, but all design must treat Traitors as solo antagonists. Items, objectives, or abilities that explicitly force teamwork or confrontation with other traitors should be avoided. Conflict and teamwork should be built naturally through the individual actions each Traitor makes.
```

A round where the majority of traitors completely redtext and nothing happens should be completely avoided if possible. On the other hand, a round where all traitors greentext and completely sweep the station and security department should be exceedingly rare.

Rounds should ideally sit in a sweet spot, where both sides make small and large victories but neither is able to completely demolish the other. Traitors should feel like they're always just out of reach of security without security feeling oppressive. Security should feel like they are always on the backfoot when it comes to catching the traitors, catching a Traitor should feel like a major victory. The whole station should be in an uphill battle against constant sabotage and workflow interruptions that they're only just barely able to deal with. 

A typical round of traitors should start with each traitor receiving their list of objectives. These objectives should encourage antagonistic activity throughout the round, either due to quantity or difficulty. 

> Higher quantity objectives should be easy to complete, hard to reverse, and have a tangible impact on the round but never be round-ending on their own. These could include killing a random crewmember or actively sabotaging some common machine. This allows even new traitors to have some tangible impact on the round, even if they are caught immediately and executed. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Higher quantity objectives should be easy to complete, hard to reverse, and have a tangible impact on the round, but never be round-ending on their own. These could include killing a random crewmember or actively sabotaging some common machine. This allows even new traitors to have some tangible impact on the round, even if they are caught immediately and executed. 
```
